Generate GX conformant credentials for VM Images (#75)
SovereignCloudStack/gx-credential-generator: README.md

# gx-credential-generator

> Tool for creating [Gaia-X Crecentials](https://gitlab.com/gaia-x/technical-committee/architecture-document/-/blob/master/architecture_document/gx_conceptual_model.md#gaia-x-credentials), previously known as Gaia-X Self-Descriptions, for SCS compliant cloud infrastructures (OpenStack, k8s, ...)

Reviewer: This change has gone

## Introduction

### OpenStack
We want to collect discoverable information from an OpenStack cloud,
assuming that we have access to it (as normal tenant user).

We read the OpenStack catalog to collect

> - public VM Images

Author: Yes documentation is work in progress and will be updated in #62.

Mark them as "work in progress" seems to be a good mid-term solution.

> This then should be output as GX compliant credential in JSON-LD for the Gaia-X catalogue.

Author: Done

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### OpenStack 

a. Create `clouds.yaml` configuration file
  - GX credential Generator requires access to OpenStack cluster as normal tenant user and has to be configured with these user credentials to access your Openstack cloud. This is done using [clouds.yaml](https://docs.openstack.org/python-openstackclient/ussuri/configuration/index.html). clouds.yaml is a yaml file containing several cloud configurations. Each configuration is referred by name.
  - Make sure the following keys exist in our `clouds.yaml`.  
     - `auth.user_domain_name`
     - `auth.project_domain_name`
     - `region_name`

 
b. Generate Gaia-X Credentials

   - To print OpenStack properties in JSON-LD
```bash
   python3 cli.py openstack <os-cloud>
   ```
[//]: <> (- To store OpenStack properties as several credentials in wallet
   ```bash
   python3 cli.py openstack <os-cloud> --wallet
   ```)

[//]: <> (- To omit to print OpenStack properties on screen and to store OpenStack properties as credential in wallet
   ```bash
   python3 cli.py openstack <os-cloud> --wallet --no-print

>    ```)

Reviewer 2: The `[//]:` strings don't seem to be right.

Author: See https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/gx-credential-generator/pull/75#discussion_r1535115661

> ### K88

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### K8s
```

Generate Gaia-X Credentials
   - To print K8s properties ... 
   ```bash

>    ./gx-sd-generator.py k8s

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   ./gx-cred-generator.py k8s
```

required attribute and check validation result):
```bash
./sd/validate.py sd/gx_service_offering_example.jsonld sd/gx_shapes_latest.ttl
```

## Compliance

GX Credential Generator creates credentials compliant with the latest (3024/01/19) Credential Schema, which can be downloaded from the [GX registry](https://registry.lab.gaia-x.eu/v1/api/trusted-shape-registry/v1/shapes/trustframework).
GX Credential Generator **does not** create W3C complaint [Verifiable Credentials](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model/).

## Configuration

GX Credential generator is configured by `config.yaml`. The configuration includes:

- Mandatory: Default values for mandatory attributes
- Optional: Values for optional attributes
- Optional: Wallets

### Mandatory Attributes
Gaia-X Credential schema dictates mandatory attributes for some class. If values for mandatory attributes can not be access from OpenStack or K8S cluster, default values are taken from configuration file in section `default`.
Providers are able to change default values. In doing so, attribute values for **ALL** instances of impacted cloud resource are modified. 

#### CopyrightOwner, License and ResourcePolicy of VM images

> `copyrigthowner`, `license` and `resourcePolicy` are mandatory attributes for VM Images and their operating systems. As these values are not accessible from OpenStack cloud, default values are used. The values for operating system are defined in section `operating system` with one section for each operating system. Operating systems are refered by name, e.g. for Alpine Linux. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`copyright owner`, `license` and `resource policy` are mandatory attributes for VM Images and their operating systems. As these values are not accessible from OpenStack cloud, default values are used. The values for operating system are defined in section `operating system` with one section for each operating system. Operating systems are refered by name, e.g. for Alpine Linux. 
```

are the attributes according to the examples and `config/config.yaml`

Author: These attributes are proper names from Gaia-x ontology and must be written as one word.

> `copyrigthowner`, `license` and `resourcePolicy` are mandatory attributes for VM Images and their operating systems. As these values are not accessible from OpenStack cloud, default values are used. The values for operating system are defined in section `operating system` with one section for each operating system. Operating systems are refered by name, e.g. for Alpine Linux. 

Reviewer 2: This is still not resolved. The suggestion was not applied. Suggested change:

```suggestion
`copyright owner`, `license` and `resource policy` are mandatory attributes for VM Images and their operating systems. As these values are not accessible from OpenStack cloud, default values are used. The values for operating system are defined in section `operating system` with one section for each operating system. Operating systems are refered by name, e.g. for Alpine Linux. 
```

> `copyrigthowner`, `license` and `resourcePolicy` are mandatory attributes for VM Images and their operating systems. As these values are not accessible from OpenStack cloud, default values are used. The values for operating system are defined in section `operating system` with one section for each operating system. Operating systems are refered by name, e.g. for Alpine Linux. 

Author: Done.

```yaml
default:
  operating system:
    Alpine Linux:
      copyright owner: "Alpine Linux"
      resource policy: "default: allow intent"
      license:
        - https://gitlab.alpinelinux.org/alpine/aports/-/issues/9074
```

> By default, generator uses operating system values for VM Image as well. I.e. by default, VM Image and operating system have the same values for `copyrigthOwner`, `license` and `resourcePolicy`. Providers are able to change values for each VM image, individually. Therefore, the section `own images` in `cloud resources` exists. To set individual values for a specific VM image, add a new section, started by image's name (as defined in OpenStack cloud) to configuration file. The following example defines ìndividual values for `copyrigthOwner`, `license` and `resourcePolicy` for VM image called `AlmaLinux 8`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, generator uses operating system values for VM Image as well. I.e. by default, VM Image and operating system have the same values for `copyright owner`, `license` and `resource policy`. Providers are able to change values for each VM image, individually. Therefore, the section `own images` in `cloud resources` exists. To set individual values for a specific VM image, add a new section, started by image's name (as defined in OpenStack cloud) to configuration file. The following example defines ìndividual values for `copyright owner`, `license` and `resource policy` for VM image called `AlmaLinux 8`.
```

Reviewer: this change seems to have gone as well

Author: See https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/gx-credential-generator/pull/75#discussion_r1535106369

```yaml
cloud resources:
  own images:
    AlmaLinux 8:
      copyright owner:
        - "AlmaLinux OS Foundation"
        - "ABC"
      resource policy: "abc"
      license:

>           - https://www.abc.org

Reviewer 2: Is ABC just an arbitrary term/example? If so `example.com` or `example.org` should be used instead of `abc`.

```

### Optional Attributes

> Similar to mandatory attributes, GX Credential Schemas supports optional attributes, whose values can not be retrieved from OpenStack cloud. These values can be set in configuration file in section `cloud resources` as well.

Author: Done.

#### AggregationOf of VM Images

> GX Credential schema allows to describe cloud resources, such VM images, in a fine granular manner, by using attribute `aggregationOf`. This attribute refers a list of GX credentials either as [DID](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/) or as file path relative to generators working directory. The latter is copied to cloud resource's credentials. For more details on GX credential schema and its attributes, please refer [Gaia-X Service Characteristics GitLab](https://gitlab.com/gaia-x/technical-committee/service-characteristics)   

Reviewer: this change has gone

[//]: <> (### Wallets)
[//]: <> (Wallets are digital secure storages to store Verifiable Credentials, like GX credentials. GX generator stores generated GX credentials in all configured wallets. Wallets are configured in section `wallets`. The following wallets are supported:)

> [//]: <> (- File System:

Reviewer 2: These `[//]:` strings don't seem right.

Author: My WYSIWYG editor uses `[//]` to mark comments, bit GitHub unfortunately not. I removed them.

docker run -v "${PWD}/os_secret:/root/.config/openstack" $(docker build -q .)  ./gx-sd-generator.py --os-cloud gx-h61.1
```

Generated SelfDescriptions could be validated against their schemas (shapes) by the 

> simple SD validator script. Visit the `sd` directory and try to validate your 

Reviewer 2: The suggestion was not applied.

> simple SD validator script. Visit the `sd` directory and try to validate your 

Author: I did this manually.

generated SD. Find the examples in `sd` directory and do the validation as follows:
```bash
./sd/validate.py sd/example.jsonld sd/example.ttl
```

> 

Reviewer 2: The folder `sd/` doesn't exist anymore.

Reviewer: Has this been addressed? I still think `./sd/validate.py` doesn't exist any more.

Author: You are right. I removed this paragraph.
